# 1.2: Data Warehousing Concepts

## Data Warehouse
A data warehouse is a subject-oriented, integrated, time-variant, and non-volatile
collection of data in support of management's decision making process. Data warehousing
is the process of constructing and using data warehouses.

A data warehouse:
- Stores data consistenly across an organisation
- Makes well organised and represented data accessible across an organisation 
- Facilitates reporting and analysis

Data warehouses are used in many applications:
- Good information derived from raw data allows companies to make better decisions
- Leads to better designed and organised databases
- Allows organisations with multiple departments to organised differently designed
databases

## Data Warehouse Philosophy
There are a few principles that help us understand the intentions of the underlying
data warehouse design.

### Enterprise Data
A data warehouse should always include data that is applicable to the enterprise.
Data that is irrelevant to the enterprise should be localised in its relevance.

### Subject Orientation
Data in data warehouses are organised around the business subjects. A data warehouse
presents data that reflects major subject areas within an enterprise, for example:
- Business entities: Customers, Vendors, Agents, etc
- Business subjects: Sales, Manufacturing, Distribution, etc

### Data Integration
The data within a data warehouse is presented in a uniform manner and presents
a consistent and seamless statement of the enterprise.

Data integration can occur in a few ways:
- **Data forms** include the types and layouts data must follow, e.g. phone numbers
need to be (07) 3138-5212
- **Functions** include the meaning of data within some data element, e.g. codes
often differ between business units and must be reconciled to the entire organisation
can leverage them.
- **Measures** refer to the unit of measurement at which data is expressed, e.g.
the barrel, the shipload, the gallon used in different departments. A data warehouse
will reconcile these different units of measurement.

### Non-volatility
A data warehouse reflects both the historical and current state of the enterprise.
This means it's important to ensure that once data is written into the warehouse,
it's never deleted or updated. This allows the data warehouse to better express the
entreprise across time.

### Time Variant
Time variant data allows the warehouse to express the enterprise at some moment in time.
This moment in time usually has a gain, a millisecond, a minute, hour, day, week, month,
year, and so on.

There are three different historical contexts:
1. **As it is**: The data is expressed so the enterprise looks as it does now
2. **As it was**: The data is expressed so the enterprise looks as it was
3. **As if nothing changed**: The data is expressed so the enterprise looks as if nothing
has changed

## Multi-dimensional Models
Multi-dimensional models represent data in an n-dimensional space typically called
a data cube or hypercube.

A cube consists of a set of cells associated with measures that allow some quantitative
evaluation of various aspects of the analysis problem at hand.

For example, a three-dimensional cube for a sales multi-dimensional model may contain:
- Dimensions: Store, Time, Product
- Measures for cells: The amount of total sales in AUD or quantity of units sold.

### Advantages
- Uses less disk space due to it being compressed and it not needing to be indexed
- Performs faster OLAP operations because:
    - the way the data is physically stored allows minimizations to the number of operations needed
    - aggregated values can be pre-calculated

### Disadvantages
- Processing time for loading the database and calculating the aggregate values.
The aggregated values need to be re-calculated every time the source data is updated.
- Scalability: An MDB does not scale well for large databases or large numbers of dimensions.

## Data Warehouse vs Data Mart
A data warehouse is a repository of enterprise wide data across many or all subject
areas while a data mart is a subset of the data warehouse that focuses on a specific
subject.

| Data warehouse | Data mart |
|--|--|
| Entreprise-wide scope | Department-wide scope |
| Multiple subjects | Single subject |
| From all data sources | From one or few data sources |
| Structured using constellation schema | Structured using star or snowflake schema |

## Data Warehouse Architecture
A Data warehouses architecture is split into 5 different tiers:
1. Data sources
2. Back-end tier
3. Data warehouse tier
4. OLAP tier
5. Front-end tier

### Back-end Tier
The back-end tier is composed of Extraction-Transformation-Loading (ETL) tools and
a data staging area. It's used to feed data in from operation databases and other
internal/external data sources.

It acts as an intermediate database where all the data integration and transformation
processes can be run prior to the loading of data into the data warehouse.

### Data Warehouse Tier
The data warehouse tier is composed of an entreprise data warehouse, a number
of data marts, and a metadata repository which stores information about the data
warehouse and its contents.

Meta data is essentially data about data and has been traditionally classified
into technical and business metadata where:
- **Business metadata** describes the meaning of the data and any orgranisation 
rules, policies, and constraints in relation to the data
- **Techincal metadata** describes how the data is structured and stored within
the system ontop of the applications and processes that manipulate said data.

### OLAP Tier
The OLAP tier, or Online Analytical Processing tier, supports multi-dimensional
data and operations. There are three types of OLAP servers:
1. **Relational OLAP (ROLAP) servers**: These servers store data in relational databases
and support extensions to SQL and special access methods. ROLAP is considered more scalable
in handling large volumes of data.
2. **Multi-dimensional OLAP (MOLAP) servers**: These servers directly store multi-dimensional
data in special data structures that implement OLAP operations. MOLAP typically offer
less storage but perform better when multi-dimensionaldata is queried.
3. **Hybrid OLAP (HOLAP) servers**: These servers manage to combine the best of 
bothe technologies benefiting from the storage capacity of ROLAP while having fast
the query performance of MOLAP.

### Front-end Tier
The front-end tier deals with data analysis and visualisation. It contains many 
tools such as:
- **OLAP tools**: which allow interactive and manipulation of the warehouse data
- **Reporting tools**: which generate reports
- **Statistical tools**: Which are used to analyse and visualise the cube data
- **Data-mining tools**: Which allow the user to analyse data in order to discover
valuable knowledge such as patterns and trends

## OLTP vs OLAP

| On-line Transaction Processing Systems (OLTP) | On-line Analytical Processing Systems (OLAP) |
|--|--|
| Designed for efficiently processing transactions | Designed for analysis and decision support |
| Customer-oriented | Marked-oriented |
| Cover most of the day-to-day operations of an organisation | Organise and presents data from different sources of an organisation |
| Access patterns consist of short and standardised queries, update, or retrieval | Accesses are read-only operations with retrieval/report over updating |
