# 1.4: Data Quality

## Data Quality
Data quality is extremely important with data warehouses as it determines the
reputation and value of that warehouse. Quality data is vital to the success
of a data warehouse and data mining.

Quality within a data warehouse requires measures. For example,
- Completeness
    - Quantifiable: "At least 95% of the warehouse should be present in the data warehouse"
    - Not Quantifiable: "Most of the warehouse should be present in the data warehouse"
- Latency
    - Quantifiable: "The warehouse data should be in by 6:30am"
    - Not Quantifiable: "The warehouse data should be in the data warehouse 
    before the staff arrive"
- Reasonable
    - Quantifiable: "Total inventory movement in the warehouse should be within 
    5%(+/-) the seasonal average"
    - Not Quantifiable: "Total inventory movement in the warehouse should be similar
    to the average inventory movement"

## Deming's Process Control 
Product quality is determined by the quality of the process used to make a product.

A data warehouse process that is in control will generate good data that meets
expectations. If a single process is out of control, the ETL process should be stopped
to allow time for the errant ETL process to be adjusted.

## Process Management
Data warehouse processes can be controlled through:
- Data models
- Data extraction
- Data transformation
- Reporting
- Customer education
- Data warehouse education
- And more..

### Data Model
Data behaviours can be measured by identifying instances of data in the data warehouse
that contradict expectations identified in the target system analysis. 

For example:
- **Relational Integrity**: The primary/foreign key relations between tables require
a primary key in the parent table for every foreign key in a child table.
- **Domain**: Data values must be within the domain
- **Range**: Data values must be within the expected boundary

### Data Extraction
Data extraction is the process used to identify the source data that is expected 
to provide the data needed by the data warehouse.

This data must:
- Meet the expectations of the source system, i.e. relational integrity, domain, range
- **Be complete**: The entire population of enterprise entities are supposed in a data
set. Instances of any missing entities can be recorded and counted as individual instances
of failure.
- **Be within a certain latency**: Instances of unavailable source data within a time
frame can be recorded and counted as individual instances of failure.
- **Align with the business rules**: Instances of source system data that violate the
source system business rules are counted as individual instances of failure.

### Data Transformation
Data tranformation has the chance to produce data values that do not conform
to the business rules for that particular warehouse.

For example, the transformed data may violate:
- **Relational Integrity**: A transformation could create orphan foreign keys
- **Domain**: A transformation could create data values that are not in the expected domain
- **Range**: A transformation could create data values that are not within the expected range
- **Completeness**: A transformation could create a set of data with gaps in the data set
- **Latency**: A transformation could consume and produce a data set too slow

## Dealing with non-conforming data
When non-conforming data arises within a data warehouse the normal method of
communication is to address the situation to people within the organisation, such as
a data stewardship, as well as write down enough information about it in a report.

A data steward is someone in the organisation who:
- Has a complete understanding of both the business area and data warehouse
- Must be able to engage in the general oversight of the data warehouse
- Participates in all communications between the business area and the data warehouse

## Customer Relations
Customer relations is the activity of: 
- Establishing contact with customers
- Managing communications with customers
- Analysing information about customer
- Campaigning to attract new customers
- Performing business transactions with customers
- Servicing customers
- Providing customer support

