# OLAP Query Processing Efficiency

## Efficient Computation of Cubes
It's important that data warehouse systems are able to support highly efficient
cube computation techniques and query processing techniques. Efficient computation
of aggregations across many sets of dimensions is the key part.

In SQL terms, these aggregations are referred to as group-by operations. For
example, an aggregation query on a 3D cube (location, item, time) could be:
- "Compute the sum sales, grouping by location and item" = (location, item) cuboid
- "Compute the sum sales, grouping by location" = (location) cuboid

## Number of group-bys
For a cube of \\(n\\) dimensions, let \\(L_i\\) be the number of attributes associated
with dimension \\(i\\). The total number of cuboids is

\\[
    \prod_{i=1}^n (L_{i}+1)
\\]

where \\(1\\) is added for the value of 'not group-by'.

For example, if we have a 3D cube with location, item, and time, the number of
group-bys is \\(2^3 = 8\\):
- (location, item, time)
- (location, item, not)
- (location, not, time)
- (not, item, time)
- (location, not, not)
- (not, item, not)
- (not, not, time)
- (not, not, not)

## Curse of Dimensionality
As with everything, there are drawbacks of having dimensionality:
- For an \\(n\\)-dimensional cube, if we consider the attributes of each dimension,
the number of cuboids can be huge.
- The computational cost becomes very big when the dimensions have many attributes
- The efficiency of OLAP comes from pre-computed cuboids, but not all the cuboids
calculated will be needed. A more reasonable solution to this is partial materialization
where only some of the cuboids are pre-computed (or materialised).

## Materialization
- **No Materialization**: None of the cuboids are pre-calculated. This leads to
computing expensive multi-dimensional aggregates on the fly.
- **Partial Materialization**: Only an identified subset of cuboids are pre-calculated.
- **Full Materialization**: All the cuboids are pre-calculated. This requires a huge
amount of memory space in order to store all the pre-computed cuboids.
