# 2.1: SQL Server

## SQL Server
SQL Server is Relational Database Management System and has become an integrated
platform that provides powerful data analysis, data mining facilities and rich reporting
capabilities.

## Database Engine
A database engine is the core service for data storage, processing, and querying data.
It's optimised for rapid transaction processing in order to meet the requirements
needed for data consuming applications.

## Integrated Services
SQL Server Integration Services, or SSIS, is a platform for data integration and
transformation.

Microsofts data Extract, Transform, and Load (ETL) tool provides the ability to:
- Extract data from a wide variety of sources of varying data formats.
- Provide a rich set of built-in tasks, transformations, and graphical tools
for building packages to perform ETL processes.
- And more..

## Analysis Services
Analysis Services is an analytical data engine used to help support decision making
and business analytics.

It includes a data mining component that allows for the analysis of large amounts
of data via mining hidden relationships and patterns.

## Reporting Services
Reporting Services is a web-based solution for designing, deploying, and managing
flexible web-based reports, ontop of traditional paper reports. It allows users 
to create ad hoc reports based on pre-defined report models.

A report model is a metadata description about data and the relationships between
data elements.

## SQL Server Database Objects
When we refer to a server in SQL Server, what we're really referring to is the
SQL Server instance. The database is the highest level object within a SQL server.

Object names:
- Must be identified by a 4-part, fully qualified name, i.e. `serverName.databaseName.schemaName.objectName`
- Have a default schema of `dbo` however, this can be ommited allowing the fully 
qualified name to be shortened, i.e. `FITPA000323232.AdventureWorks2017.DatabaseLog`
- When refered to, must have their appropriate scope, i.e. for a user-defined schema `Person`,
the appropriate schema scope would be `AdventureWorks2017.Person.Address`

## Database Types
There are two types of databases:
1. **System Databases**: Used to store system-wide data and metadata. This includes
master, model, msdb, and tempdb databases as well as other hidden resources database.
2. **User Databases**: Created by users to store application data

No matter the type of database however, they are all stored in files. When a user
database is created, all tables in the database are stored within a single file.
Upon inital creaton of a database, one transaction log must be created which is
used to record all following modifications to the database.

There is always a minimum of two files:
1. A data file with the extension `.mdf`
2. A log file with the suffix `_log` and the extension `.ldf`

## SQL Server Data Types

| Data Type | Class | Size in Bytes | Nature of the data |
|-----------|-------|---------------|--------------------|
| BigInt | Integer | 8 | -2^{63} to 2^{63}-1 |
| Int | Integer | 4 | -2_147_483_648 to 2_147_483_647 |
| SmallInt | Integer | 2 | -32_768 to 32_767 |
| TinyInt | Integer | 1 | 0 to 255 |
| Float | Float | Varies, n4 if n=1 - 24 | -3.40E + 38 to 3.40E + 38 |
| Float | Float | 8 if n=25 - 53, Defaults to 53 | -1.79E + 308 to 1.79E + 308 |
| Real | Real | 4 | -3.40E + 38 to 3.40E + 38 |  
| Char | Character | Varies | Fixed-length character |
| VarChar | Character | Varies | Variable-length character |
| Text | Character | Varies | Legacy support |
| Nchar | Unicode | Varies | Fixed-length unicode character |
| NVarChar | Unicode | Varies | Variable-length unicode character |
| Ntext | Unicode | Varies | Variable-length unicode character. Legacy support only |
| Binary | Binary | Varies | Fixed-length binary data with a max length of 8000 bytes |
| VarBinary | Binary | Varies | Variable-length binary data with a max specified length of 8000 bytes |

## SQL Table
A table is made up of columns (features or attributes) and rows (records, instance).
Tables store the actual data for the database.

Each table definition contains the metadata that describes the nature of the data
it contains. If, when performing an action such as inserting, updating, or deleting a 
column, a rule is violated, then the system will reject the command.

## Diagrams
Database diagrams are a visual way to represent the database design, various tables,
column names, and relationships between other tables.

## Views
A view is a virtual table whose contents are defined by a query. It consists of
columns and rows with data but does not store any data within itself.

The rows and columns of data come from the tables referenced within the query.
The data in the view is produced dynamically when the view is queried.
