# Pattern Mining Concepts

## Association Mining
Association mining is the process of finding frequent patterns and associations 
among items in a dataset.

## Itemsets
- Items: A set of items \\(I\\) can have \\(m\\) items such that \\(I = \\{i_1, i_2, \dots, i_m\\}\\).
- Itemset: An itemset, sometimes called a pattern, is a subset of \\(I\\).
- Transaction: A transaction dataset is a set of transactions. Each transaction
is a subset of items in \\(I\\).
- Support: Support of an itemset, \\(sup(X)\\) where \\(X\\) is an itemset.
    - Relative support: The percentage of transactions in a transaction dataset 
    that contain the itemset
    - Absolute support: The total number of transactions that contain the itemset
- Frequent itemsets: An itemset is considered frequent if its support is larger
than or equal to a pre-specified minimum support.

## Association Rule Definition
Association rules represent implication relationships between two itemsets.
For example, imagine \\(X\\) and \\(Y\\) represent two itemsets and are exclusive.

\\[
    X, Y \subseteq I \\\\
    X \cap Y = \emptyset \\\\
\\]

An association rule between two itemsets can be represented as:

\\[
    X \rightarrow Y
\\]

The existence of \\(X\\) implies the possible existence of \\(Y\\).
\\(X\\) is called an antecedent while \\(Y\\) is called a consequent.

To provide a real world example, we could say \\(\\{butter, bread\\} \rightarrow \\{milk\\}\\).
This means that if a customer has already purchased butter and bread, there's a
likely chance they will also buy milk.

## Measures
- The support of a rule \\(X \rightarrow Y\\): The percentage of transactions 
in a dataset that contain both \\(X\\) and \\(Y\\): 
\\[sup(X \cup Y)\\]
- The confidence of a rule: The measure of how strong the implication is. It is
the ratio between the support of \\(sup(X \cup Y)\\) and the support of \\(X\\): 
\\[conf(X \rightarrow Y) = \frac{sup(X \cup Y)}{sup(X)}\\]
- The lift of a rule: The measure of dependencies among \\(X\\) and \\(Y\\):
\\[lift(X \rightarrow Y) = \frac{sup(X \cup Y)}{sup(X) \cdot sup(Y)}\\]
    - \\(lift(X \rightarrow Y) = 1\\): \\(X\\) and \\(Y\\) are independent of each other.
    - \\(lift(X \rightarrow Y) > 1\\): \\(X\\) and \\(Y\\) are dependent of each other and positively correlated.
    - \\(lift(X \rightarrow Y) < 1\\): \\(X\\) and \\(Y\\) are substitute of each other and negatively correlated.

## Example

| Transaction ID | Items |
| -- | -- |
| 1 | A, C, D |
| 2 | B, C, E |
| 3 | A, B, C, E |
| 4 | B, E |
| 5 | A, B, C, E |
| 6 | B, C, E |

- Minimum support: 1/3 (33% or 0.33)
- Frequent itemsets:
    - {A} : 1/2
    - {A, C} : 1/2
    - {A, B, E} : 1/3
- Examples of association rules - (support, confidence):
    - \\(A \rightarrow C (\frac{1}{2}, 1)\\)
    - \\(A \rightarrow BE (\frac{1}{3}, \frac{2}{3})\\)
