# Data Mining in SQL Server

## Data Mining in SQL Server
SQL server provides data mining facilites to extract useful information and patterns
from data within databases. These are made available via DataMining eXtensions (DMX),
a SQL-like query language.

## Building a DM Model in SQL Server
1. Model construction
    - Define the mining model structure and mining algorithm
2. Model training
    - Train the model by feeding it data from the database. This will allow it
    to generate patterns or build the classifier based on the data.
3. Model testing
    - Test the model with sample data to check its predictions, adjust the algorithm as needed.
4. Model prediction
    - Predict outcomes for new data

## Data Mining Extension (DMX)
An SQL-like query language used to describe data mining problems and perform 
data mining operations.

It's used for:
- Creating the structure of data mining models
- Training said models
- Generating predictions

## Mining Structure
A mining structure defines the source or training data. It does this via lists
of columns with their data types and information describing how they should be
used by portioning the data into training and testing sets.

A single mining structure can be used to bulid up multiple training models.

## Mining Model
A mining model is the object that performs data mining tasks based upon some
specified algorithm.

A mining model is created by:
- A subset of columns from the mining structure
- A data mining algorithm
- How the columns are to be used by the algorithm

Once the model is trained, useful patterns can be generated which are referred 
to as the model content.
