# 3.1: Entity Relationships

## Definitions
- An **Entity** is a type that contains common attributes.
- An **Attribute** is a feature or characteristic used to describe some entity.
All entity instancesof a given entity class will have the same attributes
- A **Table** is a set of entity instances where columns represent the attributes
and rows represent the entity instance.
- A **Primary Key** is a column in a table that uniquely identifies each entity instance
- A **Foreign Key** is a column in a table that serves as the primary key of another table
within the same database

## Entity Relationships
An ER -- entity relationship -- model is a conceptual model used to describe inter-related
entities within a database. It describes relationships between entities in three
ways:
1. One-to-One
2. One-to-Many
3. Many-to-Many

### One-to-One
A one-to-one relationship between two entities indicates that each instance
of one entity is related to a single instance in the other entity. For example,
imagine we have two entities, an Employee and a Workstation. An employee can use one
workstation while the workstation can only be used by one employee.

### One-to-Many
A one-to-many relationship between two entities indicates that a single instance
of one entity is related to one or more instances of another entity. For example,
imagine we have two entities, a Project Manager and a Project. One project can
relate to only one project manager but a project manager can have more than one
project.

### Many-to-Many
A many-to-many relationship between two entities indicates that one or more instances
of an entity is related to one or more instances of another entity.
