# 3.2: Schemas

## Database Schemas
A database schema consist of a set of tables and the relationships between them.
The schema allows for logical arrangement of tables and describes how they relate
to each other.

For a data warehouse, there are some established schemas:
- Star Schema
- Snowflake Schema
- Fact Constellation Schema

### Star Schema
The star schema is a simple designed structure where one table is chosen as a 
fact table and the surrounding tables the dimension tables.

The fact table containes the data about some business subject, e.g. sales, and is the table
that will be queried to retrieve information about said subject.

The dimension tables represent various aspects of the business, e.g. product, store.
Dimension tables may contain redundancy and may not be normalised.

### Snowflake Schema
The snowflake schema is similar to the star schema where there exists one fact table
and multiple dimension tables. The difference comes in how it handles dimension tables.

Dimension tables are represented by several tables linked together and avoid redundancy
via normalisation.

Normalisation is to move commonly repeating data into new tables, this allows:
- Reduced redundancy
- Reduced inconsistancy with data types and formatting
- Saved storage space

Normalisation does however increase the number of tables we need to have. This
extends to the snowflake schema as, now we have more tables, more joins need to be
performed when exectuing queries causing slower performance.

### Fact Constellation Schema
Fact Constellation schemas have multiple fact tables that share dimension tables.
The data can be both normalised and un-normalised.
