# 3.4: SSIS Tool

## SQL Server Integration Services (SSIS)
SQL Server Integration Services (SSIS) provides a tool for creating ETL packages.

## SSIS Packages
An SSIS package is an ETL application used to perform ETL processes.

A package consists of a collection of connections, control flows, data flows, parameters,
various configurations, and more.

A control flow defines a workflow of tasks and the order of them within the package.
A control flow contains:
- Control flow tasks
- Containers: A way to logically group multiple tasks together

## Connection
SSIS packages use connections to perform a variety of tasks such as:
- Connecting nodes to source or destination data stores
- Connecting nodes to relational databases allowing the execution of SQL statements
- Connecting nodes to SQL server to peform maintenance tasks
- Connecting to message queues, mail servers, and more

A package can create multiple instances of a connection manager. Connection managers
are ways to logically represent a connection.

## Control flow
A control flow defines a workflow of tasks to be executed. The tasks within a control
flow are executed in some defined order, e.g. sequential, parallel.

A control flow task itself does not do anything to the data. It is exectuing a set
of tasks that act upon some data.

## Data flow
A data flow defines a flow of data from some source to some destination. It contains
data flow components which move and manipulate the data throughout the flow.

There are three types of data flow components:
- Sources: A variety of nodes that specify where to pull data from
- Transformations: A variety of nodes detailing data transformations such as cleaning, 
manipulating, and modifying data
- Destinations: A variety of nodes that specify where the data will be output

